

# Results

## Figures 
### [Figure 1](https://github.com/epigeneticstoocean/AE17_Cvirginica_MolecularResponse/blob/master/results/manuscript/figures/Figure1/figure1.pdf) : EPF pH over the 80 day exposure.  
(A) pHEPF and (B) ΔpH (pHEPF - pHseawater) across time with standard error bars. In (A) colored dashed lines represent each treatment level averaged over the duration of the exposure and symbols at the top of the graph indicate if the pHEPF in one of the OA treatments (‘moderate OA’, 1000 uatm; ‘high OA’, 2800 μatm) was significantly different from the pHEPF in the control condition (‘control’, 580 μatm) for each time point (e.g., H0: control pHEPF = high OA pHEPF; top row: moderate OA, bottom row: high OA). In (B) the black dashed line represents the local 2 week average for each sample point which has been standardized to zero. Symbols at the top of the graph indicate significant post hoc tests, comparing the OA treatments to the control (‘Trt’) or each treatment to the pHseawater (‘Env’). In the ‘Trt’ comparisons, symbols indicate time points where either OA treatment was significantly different from the control (e.g., H0: control ΔpH = high OA ΔpH; top row: moderate OA, bottom row: high OA). In the ‘Env’ comparisons, symbols indicate time points where that treatment was significantly different from 0 (top row: Control, middle row: moderate OA, bottom row: high OA). Asterisks (*** = P < 0.001,** = P < 0.01, * = P < 0.05) and pluses (+ = P < 0.1) indicate degree of significance. Treatment points within time points were staggered along the x axis to improve visualization.

### [Figure 2](https://github.com/epigeneticstoocean/AE17_Cvirginica_MolecularResponse/blob/master/results/manuscript/figures/Figure2/Figure2.pdf) : Long term trends in EPF pH (Total) and calcification. 
Boxplots of long term (A) pHEPF by treatment, horizontal lines indicate mean seawater pH for the three treatments (dashed: control, dot-dashed: moderate OA, dotted: high OA), and (B) ΔpH (pHEPF - pHseawater)  by treatment, dotted line at zero represents the mean adjusted pHseawater. (C) Percent daily calcification rate by measured treatment pCO2 (slope = -1.521e-05, P < 0.001, R2  = 0.431), dotted line indicates calcification rate of zero percent and solid black line represents fitted regression. (D) Percent daily calcification rate by pHEPF (slope = 0.031, P = 0.028, R2 =  0.111), solid black line represents fitted regression. EPF and calcification measurements based on individuals from either day 50 or 80 time points (n = 35). Letters on on first two panels (A and B) represent levels of significance based on post hoc testing, while bars on (C) represent standard errors.
### [Figure 3](https://github.com/epigeneticstoocean/AE17_Cvirginica_MolecularResponse/blob/master/results/manuscript/figures/Figure3/Figure3.pdf) : DNA methylation responses to OA. 
(A) Proportion of CpGs by feature across data subsets. CpGsall: all CpGs in genome; CpGs5: CpGs with at least 5X coverage for each individual; DMLTrt: differentially methylated loci (DMLs) between control and OA treatments across both time points; DMLTrt_09 and DMLTrt_80: DMLs between treatments on day 9 and 80, respectively. Numbers above the bars represent the total number of CpGs for each group. (B) Boxplot of median global methylation for each sample by genome feature (PTrt < 0.0001, PTime = 0.001, PFeature < 0.0001). (C) Plot of the first two principal components from a principal components analysis (PTrt = 0.027, PTime = 0.235, PTimexTrt = 0.364), and (D) density plot of the discriminant values from a DAPC based on gene body methylation (exons and introns). Discriminant values were determined by a function that maximally discriminates between treatment using samples from day 9, then the discriminant value for each sample from day 80 was predicted using the same discriminant function. (E) Venn diagram of DMLs among treatments for each day (Day 9 Treatment and Day 80 Treatment) and among time points in the control treatment (Control Time). Overlapping regions indicate DMLs shared among comparisons. Hypermethylated DMLs in green (top number), hypomethylated DMLs in purple (bottom number).
### [Figure 4](https://github.com/epigeneticstoocean/AE17_Cvirginica_MolecularResponse/blob/master/results/manuscript/figures/Figure4/Figure4.pdf) : Global transcriptomic responses to OA. 
(A) Plot of the first two principal components from a principal components analysis (PTrt = 0.037, PTime < 0.001, PTimexTrt = 0.214). (B) Density plot of the discriminant values from a DAPC. Discriminant values were determined by using the DAPC package to estimate a function that maximally discriminates between treatment using samples from day 9, then the discriminant value for each sample from day 80 was predicted using the same discriminant function. Arrows indicate direction and degree of movement of expression patterns for control (blue) or OA (red) treatments along the discriminant function from day 9 to day 80. Both plots are based on log2-cpm gene expression.
### [Figure 5](https://github.com/epigeneticstoocean/AE17_Cvirginica_MolecularResponse/blob/master/results/manuscript/figures/Figure5/Figure5.pdf) : DNA methylation and gene expression correlations. 
(A) First two principal components and (B) the first and third components from a principle component analysis that included gene level summary variables for various attributes, expression, and methylation. Variable loadings plotted as arrows, with the length of the arrow corresponding to the relative contribution to PC variance. Significant loadings on the first two PCs included: mean methylation level (Methylation), the coefficient of variance of mean methylation levels among treatments (Methylation_CV), gene expression (Gene_Expression), the number of exons (exon), the number of CpG dinucleotides (totalCpGs), and the gene length in base pairs (gene_length). The CV of gene expression (Expression_CV) was not significant for the first two PCs but was the primary contributor to the third PC (see S3.3). (C-D) Plot of gene level DNA methylation against either (C) gene expression or the (D) gene expression CV among individuals based samples collected in the control treatment at day 9 (Gene Expression - R2 = 0.0624  , P < 0.0001; Gene Expression CVInd - R2 = 0.0658, P < 0.0001). Only genes with coverage for at least 20% of all CpGs within the gene were included (n=3,604).
### [Figure 6](https://github.com/epigeneticstoocean/AE17_Cvirginica_MolecularResponse/blob/master/results/manuscript/figures/Figure6/Figure6.pdf) : Gene expression change in response to OA as a function of DNA methylation change. 
Log2-fold change in gene expression compared to % difference in (A) mean gene methylation among treatments (Day 9 - slope = 0.0121, P < 0.0001, R2 = 0.012; Day 80 - slope = 0.0137, P < 0.0001, R2 = 0.014) and (B) significant DMLs among treatments (Day 9 - slope = 0.0005, P = 0.0005, R2 = 0.406; Day 80 - slope = 0.00054, P = 0.0004, R2 = 0.276). Orange line represents the fitted linear model. Colors in (B) correspond to DMLs that were significantly hyper- (green) and hypomethylated (purple) in the OA treatment.
### [Figure 7](https://github.com/epigeneticstoocean/AE17_Cvirginica_MolecularResponse/blob/master/results/manuscript/figures/Figure7/Figure7.pdf) : Co-expression and DNA methylation responses to OA. 
Four of the top five modules associated with ΔpH (colors are randomly assigned by the WGCNA package and have no meaning). (A) Boxplots of mean module methylation (calculated as the mean methylation for all CpGs for each gene within a module) by treatment by day. There was a significant effect of treatment on methylation in all three modules (Pcyan = 0.035, Plavenderblush3 = 0.038, Proyalblue = 0.033), but not a significant effect of time or an interaction. Eigengene expression by (B) mean module methylation (Pcyan = 0.087, Plavenderblush3 = 0.052, Pdarkred = 0.264, Plightgreen = 0.005) and (C) ΔpH (Pcyan = 0.011, Plavenderblush3 = 0.024, Pdarkred = 0.046, Plightgreen = 0.049). Solid lines indicate a significant relationship between explanatory (x-axis) and response variable (y-axis) using a linear model, while dotted lines indicate non significant trends among variables.

## Tables 

### [Table 1](https://github.com/epigeneticstoocean/AE17_Cvirginica_MolecularResponse/blob/master/results/manuscript/table/Table_1.pdf) : Gene ontology (GO) categories enriched in differentially responsive genes by treatment, summarized by molecular function (MF), biological process (BP), and cellular component (CC). 
Up- and down-regulation refers to the change in gene expression in the high OA treatment relative to the control treatment (i.e., the GO categories enriched in up-regulated genes had higher gene expression under high OA compared to the control treatment). Similarly, hypomethylation indicates the GO category was enriched with CpG loci (DNAm) that were less methylated under high OA relative to the control treatment. Names in bold represent GO categories enriched at both time points. The full category name for “oxidoreductase activity *” is “oxidoreductase activity, acting on paired donors, with incorporation or reduction of molecular oxygen”.


## Supplemental

### [Complete Supplemental](https://github.com/epigeneticstoocean/AE17_Cvirginica_MolecularResponse/blob/master/results/manuscript/Supp/Supplemental_Methods_Data.pdf)

* [Folder of individual figures](https://github.com/epigeneticstoocean/AE17_Cvirginica_MolecularResponse/tree/master/results/manuscript/Supp)


